Right thing. Let's go back to that. Cause it that's all people don't.
We ne we glossed over it. I did.
A great segue there, man. You did first time I've ever doneeg<laugh>.
The 12 to six elbow strike. Was it? Because this is what I've always said.
And I, I believe you're the one who told me this,
that when the commissions were talking about techniques,
they had seen like those karate guys and ESPN at one o'clock in the morning,
breaking bricks with their elbows. And they're like,
there's no way you could allow that strike because that strike it's would be too
deadly. Was that what happened? Close. Close.
The, when we talk about commissions, the, there was only a,
a couple of commissions at the writing of the unified rules,
as far as when we came, you know, at a degree that was back in April of 2001.
All right. And New Jersey, I started talking about the UFC was not the first,
you know, uh, show in New Jersey to go there,
but New Jersey after they had the IFFC and then the UFC,
and then they had a couple other small shows,
ring of fire starts to come in and everyone has their own rules.
The UFC had have their own rules. IFFC had their own rules ring.
A fire wants to do their own rules.
And New Jersey was that we can't have these people coming in and giving us what
their rules are. We, if they, if we're gonna do this as a sport,
we're gonna do this under our rules. And okay,
what we're gonna do is we're gonna bring people together to create those rules.
People that you know are ley, know what, who they really invited other than,
you know, I think you had the Mohegan son,
as far as the tribal commission come down, they were part of it.
New Jersey has a commission and you had mark Rattner on a conference call.
He was not there, but it was promoted this before.
Rattner worked for the UFC. This is long before mark was working for the.
Nevada city, was working from the Nevada state athletic commission.
He's the executive director.
And they bring in all of these promoters and the promoters were king of the
cage. Terryreock you had Dana white lorenzofertita
John McCarthy, Joe Silva, and Jeff Blatnik from the UFC.
You had people from pride, Yuki condo, and, uh,
condo or ever in, uh hadeki. I can't remember his name. And you had Paul Smith.
You had a couple, but that was it. That was the people there.
And the people that were really talking the most were,
was me and a doctor named Dom Colletta from New Jersey.
He was brought in as the medical advisor for the state of New Jersey.
And when it to elbows, they, they, they tried to get rid of elbows.
That was their big thing. And I was,
I was sitting there trying to combat what they were saying,
because even in New Jersey, at the time they had mu tie.
And so they had elbows that were allowed in this form. I said, look it. And,
and Jeff and I had put together a CD at the time, you know,
you had CDs with CD rom. Yeah, there you go, man. Make it on computer. And, uh,
it was cuz I knew they were gonna attack throws because that was what made Larry
hazard. You had TDO, Ortizs flat Evan Tanner.
And he picks him up in a body lock and he brings him down and he knocks him out
and Larry hazarder went like his heart started going. He's like, oh,
we don't like that. And so I knew they were gonna attack throws.
And so I took with Jeff put together all of these throws from the
1996 Olympics in Atlanta. Here's all your throws from Judah.
Here's all your throws from greeckle Roman re and God bless carrellin because he
picks people up and drives 'em on their head and it's legal. Okay.
And I had all these throws from freestyle wrestling. Greeckle Roman wrestling,
judo with all of these Olympic athletes,
picking somebody up and them falling on their head, being tossed on their head.
And that's what saved the throws and were what we came up with was
look,
what we don't want is someone being able to control another human being and
purposely make a 10 spike out of them and try to drive them down onto the mat
on top of their head, a pile driver. Exactly.
So they like Bob SAP did to Arro in pride, in pride,
in different his neck up for a long time. Yes. And that's, you know,
maybe forever. That was what we were looking at.
And so that's how we came up with, you know, no spiking and spiking.
I knew what it was because I worked out the language there cuz I was sitting
there saying, well, hold on, time out. You want to, you want,
I'm the one that's gotta come up and say, this is legal. This is not.
So we do this. If someone takes and you know, a guy shoots a lazy double,
he sh brings his head to the center,
picks him up his legs either go straight up or you know,
his legs are out like this and you purposely hold him there and try to drive him
straight down. That's a spike. That's illegal.
If I take and I pick you up as a splex and I bring you up over the top,
I can bring you as long as there is an arc to it.
Any arc makes the throw legal.
So rampage Jackson picks up Ryan Bader and spins him and brings him
down straight on his head,
legal and it makes it quick and easy for me as the referee, I see the arc,
it's legal.
I don't see an arc and I see him holding him and bring him straight down.
Now I know it's illegal.
And so I was trying to make things as easy as I could when it came to the
elbows, what they were trying to do was take away all elbows. And I go, look it,
you have elbows in Mui tie elbows. Every time you take something away,
you are changing the sport and making it to where it's harder to actually
have act because you take away elbows. I grab wrist.
And if I'm good at grabbing wrist, I can hold wrists for a while. And,
and I can't do anything.
I've gotta pull my hand out where if you grab my wrist and I'm John Jones and I
take, and I roll that elbow over and boom, and bring it down,
you let go of my wrist because you're being attacked.
And so they looked at it and said, and the Tom Colletta being the doctor said,
he goes, look it, yeah, I understand what he's saying. And he said, I,
I have a problem with one.
And it came fromgan McGee versus a guy named Brad, Gabe, uh,
Brad Gabriel from the IFFC the very first show they had G McGee. You know,
you remember six foot 11, you know, at the time in this show, about 335 pounds.
And he's fighting a guy named Brad Gabriel, who's 6 1, 210, 215 pounds.
And G you know, Brad Gabriel is trying to get a hold of again, just to survive.
Andgan is taken his arm and he's boom, boom, boom.
And he's bringing it straight down on top of Brad Gabriel's head.
And then he gets his back and he does the same thing,
like the old Brazilian style of bringing shots to the back of the head.
And he said, he goes, I I've, I can't have that. He said, I've seen,
I've seen the and break big blocks of ice like that. That's a dangerous elbow.
We can't have that.
And I started to combat it and lorenzofertita looks at me and he goes, John,
let it go. It's stupid. Wow. And I go, yes, sir. Boss.
And I backed away from it. And so that became, so that's the 12 to six elbow.
That's the 12 to six elbow.
And the whole thing with the whole positioning of it, 12 to six,
I came up with that there saying, all right, let me just make this clear this.
So we're saying that my hand comes straight up and straight down.
That's what's illegal. So 12 o'clock to six o'clock.
But if I'm inside control and I bring my arm like this, we're okay with it.
And they go, yes. And one to seven's. Okay. <laugh> one to 7, 11 30 to,
you know, all that stuff, sort of 1130 pushing it, you're pushing it. But,
and the, the problem was, see, I was there. I understood everything.
And I came out and started teaching classes and stuff. And it,
if you listen to me, you knew what it was. But other than that, you're getting,
oh, there's a paper written.
And so you're reading the paper and it says no down elbow strikes and
that's not what the rule was. Right. So we had actually had, you know,
season two of the ultimate fighter,
Joe Stevenson is gonna end up he's in the semi-finals.
I had done his earlier match. He had fought, uh,
Marcus Davis and I'd went over the rules with him. And so, you know, when,
when we talk about going over rules with fighters, there's a lot that I say,
you know, people think that, you know, you know, no, don't, don't pull hair.
Don't do the, you don't do that, but I'd gone over things.
And I explained to him, yes, he, cuz he asked me, he says in the guard,
can I do this elbow? Absolutely. From the guard,
you can do it from the guard because you're doing it from six to 12. Exactly.
Well, you're doing it. It's nine to three, three to nine,
whatever you're on your back. Right. And he goes,
and he's gonna fight in the semi-finals and he's got herb Dean is his referee.
And herb tells him, no, you can't do that. And he goes,
butja McCarthy says I can do it. And he goes, no, you can't do that.
And so I got, well, and this is the problem with MMA as we have it.
Mm herb says, no, Joe comes out to me and he says, Hey,
you told me that I could do this. I said, absolutely. You can. And he goes,
herb Dean just said, I can't. I go, I'll take care of it.
And I go to herb and I said, Hey,
did you tell Joe Stevenson that he can't do this elbow strike? He goes, yeah.
He goes, that's illegal. You can't do that. I go, Joe. I, I said, I, sorry,
herb. I go, what do you mean? It's illegal. I go, it's 12 to six.
I go, his hand's not coming straight up and straight down. And he goes, yeah,
Johnny. He goes that's if the clock's on the wall,
but if you're on your back and your clock's on the ceiling, he goes,
that's 12 to six. Oh Jesus. Oh, this is what happens. And I, I looked at him.
I said, her, when in the, have you ever seen a clock on a ceiling?
<laugh> and 's why I haven't, but it makes sense. And you have these officials,
but it's not enhanced by gravity. Hello. But it's still it's even with.
Gravity. Yeah. It doesn't make any sense matter.
Right now I can tell you why haven't even changed because of doctors and fear.
The no one wants to be the one to change it. Look at,
look at all the controversy we had when we changed.
Just the bit that we've changed so far. Right.
And that was one of the things we, we wanted to change. The hand touched.
We had it. Yeah. And I'll talk about that if you want. Yeah.
But we had it in there and the doctors for the ABC said, Nope,
we don't want to touch that.
So right now they can tell you what was their rationale? Their rationalees,
they don't understand it. And they're afraid to say they are,
they look at the SP and they look at it from a different view than you and I,
as people that are a part of it. You and I as fans, any of that,
they look at it from, well, right now we've been doing this for,
we'll say, 20 years, 15 years, wherever you're at,
how long they've been doing it.
And we haven't had a problem having that as being a legal, right.
So as soon as we bring it into, okay, now it's legal.
And we have a fighter that supposedly gets hurt by it.
And now they come after us saying, well, before it was illegal,
you guys made it legal. That's why I got hurt.
And that's what they're trying to avoid. They don't,
they're looking at litigation and they're looking at saying, you know what,
why bring that in? There's no point. It's so frustrating.
That's totally.
That's a very frustrating. But right now I will tell you,
the university of Auburn is doing a study for us about
elbows and the power behind each different type that we're having them do,
being that one up and down. So I've already had,
I used to do things with sports science,
and they've already done that a test for me. So I know what it is. Right.
But we'll have a university having a test. And so now it's gonna come out.
That elbow strikes that all these elbow strikes that are allowed are all much
more powerful than that elbow strike. Well.
Not only that, but, but forget about power because you know,
you could take whatever, you know,
dominant Cruzs most powerful technique and then use Francis and Ghana's Jack
<laugh>. So are we,
are we just saying that you can't have power cuz that doesn't make any sense at
all? Ex well.
No, because see that's what the whole thing is with that elbow strike. Right?
It's so powerful. But what about a kid? It's not exactly.
It's nothing compared to a, like a wheel kick person, a back kick. I, I try.
To get people to understand, you know, being a hunter,
you have an idea of ballistics. Okay. And it's like,
and people get in this whole thing about, you know,
girls and guys and fighting and stuff. And I, and I try to tell 'em look it,
you cannot expect Demetrious Johnson to have the power
of a Francis nanono or steeping milchi okay.
Or steeping music or Daniel corme or let's go down lower. George St.
Pierre giant heavy. He has 125 pounds.
We'll say the night that he's fighting a hundred thirty five hundred thirty nine
pounds of weight right behind it. He is a 22 caliber. Right? Okay.
I'm not saying he can't hurt you,
but he's not gonna drop you because he just doesn't't have his size.
And you have certain genetics, not genetics,
certain components that are coming into play because.
Like the Joseph benavvita's fight, look at what Joseph was.
Doing for brings it in more power based upon movement of
right. He can drop somebody precision timing, but he,
he can drop somebody with a kick because there's more weight and more power
behind it. He can drop somebody with a knee.
But when we look at lighter weight fighters, we're gonna get people,
human beings are put together, basically the same. Okay.
Obviously there's this guy can take a shot. This guy. Can't okay.
That's out there.
But if you're a fighter and you get used to accepting damage,
accepting punishment,
you can accept a lot of things to a certain point where that person's
speed and power come together to create a velocity that will put anybody
out.
And that just comes with strength and weight and size because the
22 caliber bullet is not like the 45 caliber bullet. Yeah.
And no matter who the athlete is,
the downward elbow is not going to be the most powerful strike in their arsenal,
unless there's just some downward El elbow wizard <laugh> and there might be
a few of those guys out there. I mean it's and the, the tie world,
there might be some guy who does one of those Tomahawk elbows. Yeah.
That just has a vicious one, but P for those guys,
for this few and far between. So tell.
Me how that elbow is gonna be stronger than a guy with a rolling thunder kick
with his heel hitting somewhere on top. It's.
Not gonna be, or it's in barbbos a wheel kick. Hello, yeahs.